# RENTAL COSTS ON THE RISE

Team 120: Jenelle Allen, Nancy Beard, Orpa Jackson, [Wildo Acosta](linkedin.com/in/wildo-acosta-qui√±ones-86215484), [Ali Lara](https://www.linkedin.com/in/aliglara)

Many Americans today have chosen to rent housing vs. buying. Some of
their choices are no maintenance costs to cover, no real estate taxes to
pay, access to complimentary amenities, or even more flexibility if the
renter decides to relocate. Rental properties were forced to lock in on
current rental rates during the pandemic. However, now that Americans
are returning to normalcy, rental rates have risen.

Typically, the highest rent increase was about 3% in the past. However,
America is seeing at least an 11% increase from a year earlier, with
some larger cities showing 30-40% increases. Unfortunately, the average
renter's income is not increasing at these same rates, causing renters
to become homeless. Even though many homeless people might be employed,
they just cannot afford housing.

An increase in homelessness can bring on more challenges than trying to
correct the affordable housing issue. Firstly, homeless people are
exposed to more outside elements -- hot, cold, rain, snow, hurricanes,
tornados, which increase the likelihood of getting sickness, injury or
disease can spread.

Secondly, a strong correlation between homelessness and increased crime
has been reported. Not that the homeless are the person(s) causing the
crime necessarily. But due to harsh living conditions and lack of
defending themselves, they are vulnerable to hate crime (Bridges, 2022).

Finally, the homeless community often use resources provided from
vendors at no cost to the public but buy nothing from the vendor in
return. One such person could be referred to as a temporary squatter.
For example, the nearby Starbucks or mall with free WIFI has a seat
taken for a period because the homeless needs WIFI access to continue
working or look for employment. With a free resource being used but no
income from a sale, the vendor may be forced to increase prices,
affecting all individuals.

## Databases

Datasets that may have useful information showing how homelessness and
rent are on the rise with any contributing factors are:

- [National Alliance to End Homelessness](https://endhomelessness.org/)
- [Kaggle.com](https://www.kaggle.com/)
- [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development](https://www.hud.gov/)
- [National Association of Realtors](https://www.nar.realtor/)
- [National Coalition for the Homelessness](https://nationalhomeless.org/)

## References

Whaley RB, Abbott J. How Safe Is Life on the Road? Criminal
Victimization Among a Sample of U.S. Nomads and the #VanLife Community.
Crime & Delinquency. April 2022. doi:10.1177/00111287221087957

<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/02/10/rent-rising-inflation-housing/>

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-09-29/u-s-rents-are-accelerating-at-shocking-rates-of-more-than-10>

<https://www.cnn.com/2021/09/30/homes/rents-going-up-in-us-feseries/index.html>

<https://www.cnet.com/personal-finance/mortgages/rent-increases-by-nearly-20-across-the-us-what-renters-need-to-know/>

<https://caufsociety.com/lack-of-affordable-housing/>

<https://nationalhomeless.org/issues/housing/#:~:text=This%20deficit%20of%20affordable%20housing%20has%20led%20to,have%20such%20a%20dire%20lack%20of%20affordable%20housing>
